Gammy's Apple Pie 

CRUST:

2 cups flour
1 tsp salt
3/4 cup solid shortening (like Crisco)
1/4 to 1/2 cup ice water

Mix together the flour and the salt.  Cut in the shortening until the pieces
are pea-sized.  Add 1/4 to 1/2 cup of the water and stir with a fork until the
dough is moist enough to stick together but is not soggy.

Sprinkle your pastry cloth (or whatever you use) with flour.  Divide the pie
crust dough in slightly uneven halves.  Form the larger of the two halves
into a ball and place on the pastry cloth.  Pat into a circle about five
inches in diameter.  Begin to roll out from the center outward with light
strokes.  Be sure your rolling pin is floured also.

Once the circle is about 7 inches in diameter, pick up the piece of dough,
reflour underneath it and flip it over.  This will ensure that there is enough
flour to keep the dough from sticking.  (Note:  if the dough is sticking too
much, that means you put too much water in it.  Add more flour.  If the dough
is crumbly and won't stick together at all, that means it needs more water.)

Resume rolling it out until you reach the size of your pie pan (usually 9 or
10 inches).  At this point, you can roll out the edges, too.  The idea is just
to not have too much dough in the middle.

Once the dough is the proper size (Don't worry; it won't be even.), pick it up
by rolling it around the rolling pin.  Carefully transfer it to the pie pan
doing your best to center it over the pan.  Once you release it from the
rolling pin, gently pat it in place in the pan, making sure there aren't any
gaps between the dough and the inside edge of the plate.  Trim the dough with
a knife so that it is even with the edge of the pie pan.  Throw the extra
dough in the bowl with the remaining half.

At this point, you would add your fruit filling and then proceed with the top
crust.  The top crust is made virtually the same way; however, you would want
it rolled out a little bigger than the bottom so that you have enough crust to
flute.  I flute by pinching the crust between my two index fingers and thumbs
as though I was opening a change purse.  Be sure to cut slits in the top crust
for the steam to escape.

FILLING:

3-4 Granny Smith apples, depending on size, peeled and sliced
1/2 cup brown sugar
1/2 cup granulated sugar
1/4 cup flour
1 tsp apple pie spice (or 1 tsp cinnamon and 1/2 tsp nutmeg)

Line pie plate with unbaked pastry.  Mix together the sugars, flour
and spices.  Pour 1/2 of this mixture into the pie plate, smoothing
evenly across the bottom.  Lay the apples in the crust, enough so that
they reach the top of the plate but aren't mounded over it.  Sprinkle
the remaining flour mixture over the top of the apples.  Sprinkle 1
tablespoon of lemon juice over the top, then dot with 1 tablespoon of
butter.  Add the top crust and cut slits for steam.

Bake 15 minutes at 425 degrees, then reduce heat to 350 and bake
another hour.  The trick with apple pie is to be sure and bake it long
enough for the apples to be soft.  I usually stick a fork inside one
of the slits to make sure, but an hour should be plenty.  If the edge
of the crust starts to brown too much, cover it loosely with foil.

It's a good idea to set the pie on a cookie sheet in case the apples
are particularly juicy and spill over into the oven.
